---
title: Skills I Have (and Don’t Have)
description: Inhabiting a space between designers and developers.
date: April 5, 2020
hero:
    image: skills-hero
    thumb: skills-thumb
    alt: White Sands National Monument
extra:
    js:
        - /asset/js/fadeshow.js
    css:
        - https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Source+Code+Pro:500,700
---

I’ve been designing and building web stuff in San Francisco for a while now. And during this time there have been some dramatic shifts in technologies, and along with it, job titles. UI Developer, Web Designer, UX Engineer — they can mean lots of different things and I often find myself struggling to explain what it is I actually do.

<div class="pullquote">
<p>People who are skilled at frontend design are in a great position to help bridge the divide between the design and development worlds&hellip;Embrace the fuzziness, encourage [them] to exist between worlds, and let collaboration and great work ensue.</p> <span class="credit">Brad Frost</span>
</div>

At a high level, <a href="https://medium.com/@kaelig/introducing-design-systems-ops-7f34c4561ba7">Design Systems Ops</a> is a solid introduction by  Kaelig Deloumeau-Prigent to the sometimes ambiguously defined roles of those who, like me, operate with a mix of design and engineering. And Brad Frost’s <a href="https://bradfrost.com/blog/post/frontend-design/">Frontend Design</a> nicely captures my experience as a frontend designer, describing it as a “purgatory” between these worlds. To their credit, Optimizely did an admirable job describing how UI Engineers [fit into the organization](https://medium.com/design-optimizely/the-structure-of-optimizely-s-design-team-97e5eb3ed712#.380ngg4ou) and my experience at Thumbtack as a UI Developer was similar. But even within those titles there’s a range of experience and skills, so here goes…

## What I do

-   **Design Systems** At Optimizely I consolidated their existing brand into the [OUI](https://css-tricks.com/optimizelys-ui-library-oui-1-of-2/) Sass library for use by their products. This work was broadened significantly at Thumbtack  in the construction of the now mature, multi-platform design system, [Thumbprint](https://thumbprint.design/). With the support of three team members I helped define designs, constraints, long-form documentation, team planning, built and contributed to React components, and communicated our team’s progress at company presentations.  
-   **Live Prototyping** I’ve used or experimented with a number of different types of  tools—Framer, Principle, InVision— but found building tightly controlled, interactive web and mobile prototypes is easiest with vanilla JavaScript, CSS and HTML. And I build them quickly.
-   **Documentation** The range here is wide, from pattern libraries to code samples to living style guides. Among the many challenges are identifying the audience, making it accessible and easily searchable, and then balancing the complexity of the documentation with the ability to keep it up to date. For Thumbprint’s entry on [motion](https://thumbprint.design/guide/product/motion/) I built a number of React examples to demonstrate usage and native mobile interactions. 
-   **CSS & Sass** Having now built multiple design systems and the functional CSS library, [Atomic](https://thumbprint.design/atomic/), I’m very comfortable with authoring reliable, well-scoped styles and troubleshooting thorny browser bugs.
-   **JavaScript** I consider myself an intermediate author of vanilla JavaScript, Node, and React. I’ve built both [CSS Dig](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/css-dig/lpnhmlhomomelfkcjnkcacofhmggjmco?hl=en) and [Pointbreak](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/pointbreak/cokghbfmenpjjpgbiojoohglhbljlbha?hl=en) from scratch, and with React, built or refactored a number of components for [Thumbprint](https://thumbprint.design/) and our primary product, thumbtack.com.
-   **Design & Design Guidance** This includes everything from designing new patterns and interactions from scratch to helping Product Designers with UI and IA suggestions. In reviewing a design, prior to building the production code, I will look for how well it aligns to existing standards, if it can withstand stress tests, and if  patterns are reusable and scalable.
-   **Designer & Developer workflows**. Having worked on both sides of the aisle I understand the common pain points and have long been interested in helping them work together to make it easier, and faster, for all involved. 
-   **Tooling** Version control with Git and Github, coding with VSCode, package management and publishing with yarn and npm, code linters and formatters, and the occasional snapshot testing with Jest. 
-   **Internal Tools** I really enjoy finding productivity friction points and creating tools to help. I’ve built a number of Chrome extensions, resource trackers for brand teams, and Figma plugins for design and analytics teams.
-   **Performance**. This is a newer area of interest. I worked with Thumbprint’s Growth team to identify multiple ways—responsive images, reducing CSS payload, limiting node counts—to decrease page load time on thumbtack.com and  [fine-tuned](/write/building-genoni-dev.html#client-side) this website to make it load as fast as possible.

## What I don’t do

-   **Dedicated Frontend  Engineering** I’m acquainted with an array technology stacks, understand their general strengths and limitations, and can confidently contribute to JavaScript based applications. But if you need someone well versed in data modeling, highly complex object manipulation, or managing your webpack configuration, I will be in the kitchen toasting a bagel.
-   **Dedicated Product Design** I’ve worked as a Product Designer in the past but have not done this full time for years. It’s an area I can contribute to and I understand the processes involved but wouldn’t be appropriate for me.
-   **Project Management** Though I’ve found myself the de facto project manger in some projects, synchronizing the work of multiple teams, it’s not where I’ve spent much time.
-   **White-space Arguments** Tabs or spaces? 2 or 4? Who ate my bagel?
